# What did not work: a Tic Tac Toe Post-Mortem

In the [previous chapters](08.md), we have seen how to transform a model that rarely outputs valid Tic Tac Toe moves into an excellent player that is practically unbeatable.

But to achieve this result, I underwent several failed experiments. Let's discuss and learn from them.

## A 0.6B model that plays Tic Tac Toe perfectly... OR NOT?

I started this project with the same goal: pick a small open model and transform it into a Tic Tac Toe master with
RL Environments, but I made different initial decisions.


The environment was simpler. First, the opponent's skill wasn't very tunable: half the time, the model played
 against a random opponent, and the other half against a perfect player.

Remembering my childhood Tic Tac Toe matches, I thought: playing at the center is a good starting move. So when the opponent
was optimal, I made it always start from the center.

For the **Minimax algorithm** (optimal strategy), I thought: this is an implementation detail, let's have Claude code it.  
I ended up with something similar to this:

```python
def minimax(board: list[str | None], is_maximizing: bool) -> tuple[float, int | None]:
    """Minimax algorithm. Returns (score, best_move) for the current player."""
    
    # ...
    
    free = get_free_positions(board=board)
    if not free:
        return 0, None

    player = "O" if is_maximizing else "X"
    best_score = -float("inf") if is_maximizing else float("inf")
    best_move = free[0]

    for pos in free:
        board[pos] = player
        score, _ = minimax(board=board, is_maximizing=not is_maximizing)
        board[pos] = None

        if is_maximizing and score > best_score or not is_maximizing and score < best_score:
            best_score, best_move = score, pos

    return best_score, best_move
```

It might not be obvious, but this algorithm has a bias towards the first free optimal position on the board.
If multiple moves have the same optimal score, the first free position (ranging from 0 to 8) is always selected.

For the models, I set an ambitious goal: to use very small ones. I thought **Qwen-3-0.6B** was perfect: very small size,
good capabilities, already able to produce reasoning, non-zero rewards on my evaluation runs.

One aspect I immediately noticed: reasoning models tend to produce long thinking traces. Qwen-3-0.6B produced more than 400 tokens per completion, which is a lot for Tic Tac Toe. But who cares? This will just make training longer and, worst
case, we truncate overly long completions

Let's talk about **batch size**: for our environment, this is the number of different games played before each
update in model's weights. Despite Verifiers docs suggesting values in the 256-1024 range, this implies slower training progress, so I initially set it to 64. My model learnt from 64 games at once starting from 8 initial positions
and skills (GRPO Group size = 8).

## Results and lessons learned

Qwen3-0.6B started at 2% draws against an optimal opponent; against a random opponent, it had 40 wins, 6 draws and 14 losses.

Using the configuration described above, I trained it with Reinforcement Learning.

The results looked incredible: 99% draws against an optimal opponent; 78 wins, 6 draws and 16 losses against a random opponent.

Ok, the fact that our model was stronger against a perfect player than vs a random one sounded suspicious, but in any
case, I was happy with my experiment...

Until I actually tried to play against the trained model myself (using the
HF space I shared previously). The model was clueless. It played poorly. What a slap in the face. How was it possible?

It turns out that much of this was due to the Minimax implementation I overlooked. Since the perfect player always started from the center and was biased towards the first free optimal position,

**I was training my small model against a specific type of optimal player!**

Over ~32K games against it, Qwen simply memorized it. This also explains why performance was
higher vs the "perfect" player than the random player.

How to fix? Do not start from the center by default and, above all, randomly choose one of the optimal moves, not the 
first one.

Now onto the next lesson: training already reasoning models on a specific task is acceptable, but as we noted, they tend
to output long thinking traces (~400-500 tokens for this model, >1000 tokens for bigger models in the Qwen 3 release).

In my case, with limited GPU resources and time, I ended up truncating most of the longer completions at the beginning to fit my short
limits. This means we used a part of the training budget just to teach the model to respond concisely. At the same time,
there is a risk of "lobotomization": we might defeat the purpose of the original training by cutting off its Chain of Thought mid-reasoning.

Practical takeaway: if your task is narrowly scoped and GPU resources are highly constrained, 
**start from an instruct model and transform it into a reasoning model for your task**. This produces shorter training runs
and a model that is concise but not "lobotomized."

After my initial experiment, I kept trying to teach Tic Tac Toe to very small models (< 1.5B parameters). 
What I found is that, while Reinforcement Learning is effective at improving them, it's hard to push them to true
competency. By inspecting their completions, it seems they lack spatial understanding capabilities; they 
struggle to make sense of the board. For example, Qwen-3-0.6B really struggled to "see" diagonal lines.

What I recommend: besides evaluating the base model on your environment, 
**look at a few completions and choose a model that exhibits promising behaviors** that can be reinforced, even if the current quantitative results are not satisfying. I did this with `LiquidAI/LFM2-2.6B` and got excellent performance after training.

And regarding **batch size**? If this value is large, yes, your model apparently learns slowly, but in exchange, you get stable
training. If the batch size is small and your environment produces diverse matches and opponent skills, the model will learn
from a small number of games at once: this can reinforce suboptimal strategies, and you may observe unstable training or model collapse.

Batch size is a key parameter, and in our environment, it makes sense to set it to at least 256.

## Learning from other experiments

Even after I abandoned the initial setup for the one described in the [previous chapters](07.md), I kept iterating, making errors, and learning.

A note on **GRPO group size** (`rollouts_per_example` parameter) related to our environment.
In the RL training done in [chapter 7](07.md), batch size is 256 and GRPO group size is 8. This means 32 groups of matches, each starting from the same position and with the same opponent skill. In this specific experiment, training was relatively stable.

If we want to increase GRPO group size to have a more diverse set of outcomes for the same game (e.g. `rollouts_per_example = 16`),
 I also recommend scaling the batch size proportionally. This ensures that we maintain a similar distribution of games and opponents in a single update of model weights, preserving training stability.

The final RL training discussed in [chapter 8](08.md), even with its experimental nature, taught me other lessons.

For example, training a competent Tic Tac Toe model only against perfect players is not the best idea.
If you train long enough, the model learns what you optimize for. In this case, the model became overly defensive, failing to exploit the opponent's errors.

For a similar reason, while we are mostly interested in the win reward function, it makes sense to keep the format reward and
invalid moves penalty in our setup. If we remove them, even a model that currently behaves well with respect to these rewards can drift during training and degrade.

In the final RL refinement phase, we also increased the temperature to 1.25 to encourage exploration. If you do this,
I recommend closely monitoring training and inspecting completions to avoid the model starting to output gibberish
due to the increased probability of less likely tokens. For our case, 1.25 worked well while 1.40
was too high, leading to poor outputs and, in the long run, to model collapse. In case you need to increase the temperature,
I suggest experimenting with different values, since the correct choice depends on your specific model.

A final recommendation. It's natural to watch your logs and plots when you start training, to identify early Out
Of Memory errors or instability. It's difficult for me too, but once training begins well, I suggest stopping
staring at plots for a while (1-2 hours): Reinforcement Learning is slow and takes time to see progress. If you
continually monitor it, you risk the temptation to stop it and tweak something prematurely, whereas a slowly progressing run can turn out well given enough time.

So, start training, go for a walk, and stop obsessing on your plots!

Once trained, test your model with environments and benchmarks, but also by interacting with it and playing against it yourself.


## Next up

In this chapter, we examined the most important lessons derived from experiments with the Tic Tac Toe environment.

In the [final chapter](10.md), we'll recap what we covered and see what you can learn and build next.

---

[⬅️ Previous: RL pt.2: towards Tic Tac Toe mastery](08.md) | [Next: What we have learned and the future ➡️](10.md)